The date is August 23rd. It's 3 o'clock in the
afternoon. We're sitting here talking with Mrs.
Ruth Mendoza-Ordones, O-R-D-O-N-E-S.
Ruth grew up in the John Boniva mines, and that's
essentially what we'll be talking about this
afternoon. Okay. What year were you born, Ruth?
And the mines, and Gnevers Mines. And Gnevers
Mines, and that was 1927? Right. Okay. Would you
tell me the story of how you were born? Well, it's a
big story.
It's a horror story. I passed in the kind of days my
mother and my daddy. And... I'm not going to school
because my dad and my mother, he don't have no money
to send me to school.
Okay. Yeah, you were going to tell us a story about
the chickens and the lady that helped your mother.
Oh, one of my mother, he started playing with me,
and at the time he told me I'm too cheap. And I put
attention to my mother what he told me. Too cheap.
Uh-huh. And he said, well, daughter, I tell you
this because I don't have no money to pay the doctor
to bring you. And I pay a lady to bring you for two
chickens. So you were a cheap child, only costing
two chickens.
Right. Were you ever sick as a child out in the
mines? No. You were a pretty healthy child. Yes. If
you were born in 1927, do you remember about what
time you left the mine area? Do you remember how old
you were?
22. About 22. So you lived at the mine site after it
was closed down? Yes, right. I see. Do you remember
if your parents had to pay rent while you were
living there? No. They didn't? No, he never paid
anything. Okay, even while he was working in the
mine? Right. I see. He had a lot of help from Mr.
Ginniver. He had a lot of help? Mr. Ginniver gave
your father a lot of help. Right, because my
daddy's a boss man in the mines. I see. Would you
like to answer the phone?
If your father was a boss man and he worked on top of
the mines, or did he go inside the mines? Inside the
mines. I see. So he supervised the actual digging
out of the lignite. Yes, sir. I see. As a child, did
he ever let you go inside the mines? Sometimes,
yes, about two times. I see. Did you like going down
in the mines? No, it's awful. Awful, dirty? Right.
Was it hot? Yes, sir. I see. What is the Could you
describe the house that you lived in? What kind of
furnishings were in it? How big it was? Well, it's
an awful house. And I don't have anything good in
the house. It's an awful house. Was it one room or
two rooms? It's two rooms and one little kitchen. I
see. And did you have a table and chairs? I had one
table and two chairs. Did you have beds or did you
sleep on them? I had two beds, and so he had. And he
had a heater, wood heater. A wood heater. And so he
had. I see. And how many brothers and sisters did
you have in the family? I have two sisters. Two
sisters. Two sisters. So there were three
children and your father and your mother. Four in
the family. I see. Raffaella Flores and Ruth
Mendoza and John Mendoza and Primitiva Mendoza.
Isn't that Primitiva is your mother? No. My mother
is Mary Mendoza and Joe Mendoza. I see. Okay. What
kind of cooking utensils did you have? in your
house? Were they pots and pans? Yes. Were they tin
or iron? Iron. I see. Did you and your sisters do the
cooking or did your mother? My mother. Your mother
did? Yes, because I can cook on too little. I see.
Okay. And she cooked inside the house in the
kitchen? Yes. Okay. Did each family have their own
outhouse or Or was there a communal outhouse? Yes,
it's a communal house. Everybody has their own
house. Own outhouse. Okay. How far away was that
from the line of houses? Well, about ten feet.
About ten feet? I see. And you were telling me the
other day when we were walking over the mine site
that you had to walk. to get your water? Yes. I had to
get my water to the tanks. And that place had no
water. Was that rainwater? Yes, it's the
rainwater. So they didn't bring water? No, sir.
Well, what would happen when it hadn't rained in a
while? Was there ever water? Yes, everybody come
to town and get the water. Come to town, I see. And
get the water. In barrels? Yes, in barrels. And did
Mr. Coniver pay for that? No, sir. You have to do it
your own self. I see. And do you remember how much it
cost to get a barrel of water? A nickel. A nickel a
barrel. Okay. Okay, when your father Joe got up in
the morning, would he have breakfast before he
went to the mine? Yes, sir. He'd take a lunch. And he
took a lunch with him. What usually did he eat for
breakfast, and then what did he eat for lunch?
Well, sometimes my mother, well, he don't have
nothing to put in. Well, he put some business, and
he put the lunch, too, because he don't have no
more. I see. Well, when you did have food, what kind
of food were you eating? Well, I mean, some
potatoes, and sometimes with my mother, he had
some chickens. Chickens? Yes. I see. And then you
would have a dinner in the evening when you came
home? Yes, three times a day. Now, did your father,
when he came out of the mines at night, he must have
been pretty dirty. Yes, sir. Did he clean up at the
house, or did he clean up somewhere else? Yeah,
well, before he came to the house, he cleaned by
himself from the mines. I see. So they had bathing
facilities there? Yes, sir. Okay. What about you
and your sisters and mothers? Did you have a
bathtub or anything like that? No, sir. Just a big
towel. Everybody use it. A big shower? Yes, sir.
Was there only one for the mine? Yes, sir. Right. I
know you were kind of small, but maybe your parents
told you this. How many miners and their families
were there at the mine? The largest number at one
time, would you say?
You have no idea? Mm-mm. Do you know about how many
houses there were?
Oh, about 22 houses. About 22 houses. Yes, close to
us. So that would mean at least 22 families. Right.
OK. Now, were there any bachelors at the Boniva
mines? Yes, sir. Did they live in the two-room
houses? Yes, sir. They did? live in groups yes sir
casino had no place to live i see they didn't have a
boarding house right no sir do you remember about
when the mines shut down you know for good no sir
what what did your father joe do when the mines shut
down did he become a farmer or No, sir. He come
straight to town and find a job, and the job he find
it to cut some wood. Cutting wood. Uh-huh. For a lot
of people. And he finish that kind of job, and he
started to find a job to picking cotton for the
family. I see. It's one kind of job he do before the
mines close. Before the mines or after the mines?
After the mines. I see. So you went out and picked
cotton? Yes. As a family. Right. Shopping and big
time. Now that was only during, you know, August
and September, wasn't it? Yes. And what did y'all
do the rest of the months of the year when there
wasn't any cotton to be picked? Well, my daddy, he
started back to cotton woods for white people.
And, of course, his daughters really couldn't do
anything else. No, sir. My big sister, well,
sometimes he worked for the white people to clean
the house, and he pay a dollar a day. I see. Would she
walk to town to do that? Yes, sir. I see. You didn't
have any mules or carts or anything? No, sir. We
didn't have anything. Did some of the other
families have it? Yes, sir. I see. Now, I've heard
that some of the miners were able to save money and
have cars. Or did that happen at the Bonita Mines?
Augustine told me that he was a taxi driver. Yes. He
started to have a car. He saved some money, $2 or $3.
It is nice enough. And he buy a new car. And well, he
charged the other Spanish people to take it
somewhere else. And he charged $0.98 to bring it to
town. $0.98. I see. He told me a quarter. Must be
inflation back then.
Were you friendly with the other families in the
mining camp? Yes. Did you have parties together?
No, because he didn't have the money to support
that kind of parties. He never had nothing,
especially not my family, because it's a big
family. Right, a big family without any brothers.
Right. That must have. It's been a hardship
because the brothers could have gone out and cut
wood with the farmers. Yes, that's right. I see.
What about the celebrations for Cinco de Mayo and
Diaz Ciete? Well, my daddy is the one who
celebrates for all the Spanish people. He
celebrates about four times, and he can't support
no more. I see. And that's why the reason he stopped
to do that kind of job. I see. Do you remember any
trips that you ever made to town, to Rock Bay? About
three or four. That's all? Mm-hmm. I see. Now you
said you lived in the mines or in the mining camp
until you were 22. What happened when you were 22?
Well, I started myself to work and I started to
learn a little bit what I needed myself. And I
worked for too many people. Doing what kind of
jobs? Well, I started to clean the houses. And I
worked for too many years in that kind of job. And I
started back to work in a cafe, wash dishes. And
that, when I started in a new job, is in a nursing
home. In a nursing home? Yes, sir. About how old
were you when you started in a nursing home? 28
years. And I worked four years in a restaurant. And
did you live at the rest home where you worked? No,
sir. Did you live in town? I lived in town. Was it a
boarding house? Yes, sir. My daddy, he paid some
rent over there. And he continued to chop wood all
this time? Yes, sir. Do you do any other kind of odd
jobs? No, it's all the job he do because that's all
the job over here right there
Did your father was your father and mother were
they born here in the United States or no my mother
and my daddy he's from Mexico He brought in
Did he come over during the revolution? Yes, sir.
So it would have been after 1910 and probably
before 1920? Yes, sir. Somewhere in there? Yes,
sir. My daddy, he can talk English. My mother's the
same. He can talk English. Do you know where they
learned English? Well, my daddy's the one he
learned a little bit. My mother, he can't. And he
never learns anything. Did your parents leave any
relatives in Mexico? No, sir. They didn't have
just the two of them? Yes, my daddy and my mother.
Did they ever talk to you about old Mexico? Well,
sometime my daddy, he talked to us. He said he never
going to forget it, the town he lived before. What
did he mean by that exactly? Why he mean, because
it's his own town. And he said over here in Texas,
it's kind of hard when somebody he didn't know to
talk English. And that's hard for him.
I see. Did he ever say that he thought being in Texas
was better than being in Mexico? No, sir. He loved
Texas. The thing is hard for him because he can't
have a good job. Here in Texas? And he couldn't do
Mexico? Yes. I see. Because he talked on own
language, Spanish. I see. And over here in Texas,
he need a lot of English to have a good job. But the
jobs that he had here in Texas, did they pay better
than what he would have had in Mexico? Well, he said
he paid the same. Paid the same? Yes. But he never
wanted to go back to Mexico? No, sir. He promised
he'd never come back to Mexico. Did he ever give you
a reason for that? Well, he said he liked Texas, and
he loved Texas, and he feel more better in Texas. I
see.
Was he... Glad to see the mine shut down, or was he
upset? No, he's kind of sad when Mr. Guneva caused
the mine, because there's no jobs over here in
Rockdale. Because what? He don't have no jobs. No
jobs. In Rockdale. I see. Were there many other
families that were in the same situation? Yes,
sir. There's a lot of people he said a little bit,
because that's her fault. Did Mr. Coniver try to
help them find jobs? No, sir. He left to San
Antonio. He went to San Antonio. Yes, sir. He did
let you live at the camp for free after he left? Yes,
about three months, something like that. I see.
And everybody moved to town. But you and your
family stayed at the mining camp? Yes, a lot of
them. Did anybody ever come through and tear down
all the houses and take them away? Take the wood
away? Yes. Somebody, I don't know who, he come and
get all the houses. Do you remember about how old
you were when that happened? No, sir. But he left
your house? Yes, sir. I see. So you were the only
family over there on that road that we saw the other
day? Right. I see.
Do...
If we could go back to the cooking. I've gotten
conflicting reports. Some people said they
cooked inside. Some people said they had outside
stoves. Yes, that's the truth. They had both. Yes,
that is the truth. But my mother, he have a heater to
cook. I see. And we noticed over another mining
camp that we visited after you went home the other
day, Yes. That there were little brick squares
where the houses should be. Do you have any idea
what those were? Did you build steps or anything
like that around the houses? Well, the Spanish
people, he built a lot of things to save some
potatoes
or save something else. I see. So did they put
bricks around their little gardens? Yes, right. I
see. Did they put little brick patios, for
instance, in front of their wood houses? Right.
Did the two-room wood houses have wooden floors,
or were they dirt floors? Sometimes he put it, and
sometimes not, because he no help. I see.
This is going to be a weird question.
Do you remember the so-called Great Depression at
all? The way you described it, it seems like you
were brought up in a poor family. So I guess you
really don't know what the Great Depression was?
No. Okay.
All right. How old, if I could ask this, how old were
you when you got married, and how did you meet your
husband?
If you don't want to answer, that's all right. Did
you meet him in Rockdale? No, I miss him in Waco. In
Waco. Yes, sir. He's the hometown of my husband. I
see. He have all the family, all the brothers. He
don't have no mother. He don't have no father, too.
He pass away. I see. Did you travel to Waco to see
friends? Yes, sir. I have a lot of friends and all
the family, my husband. I see. But how did you get to
Waco to meet your husband? Did you go there for a
job? No, sir. He worked over here in Rockdale when I
met my husband. I see. And I worked in a nursing
home. Oh, I see. And the rest home is possible. I
see. And his father was in the rest home, and that's
how you met him? Yes, sir. I see. Okay.
Did... Did you ever go to the commissary at the
Beneath the Mine yourself? No, sir. I see. Your
mother did. Yes, my mother, he did. And when she had
some credit, she could go over there and buy food?
Yes, sir. Mr. Guneva gave it to her. I see. Did she
ever tell you any stories about the commissary?
Well, he told me his story. My daddy, he worked one
day, forget what he needed. And so he told me. I see.
And then you went and got... Yes, sir. I see. Could
you describe the clothes that you and your sisters
wore? Were they dresses or were they pants? Yes,
sir. Because my mother, he buys our friends that my
mother, he gave us a lot of clothes for us. The
friends helped you out with clothes? Yes, sir. I
see. Did your mother ever make any clothes? Yes,
sometimes he make it, sometimes not. I see. During
the winter, Were those houses pretty chilly,
pretty cold? Yes, sometimes, yes. And all you had
was that one little stove to keep you warm. Right.
Were there ever any days when the mine was in
operation that your father did not work? Yes, he
stayed at home and he'd go back and get some wood for
us. I see. So your father didn't work all year long?
No, sir. No, sir. Do you remember the longest
period of time that he went without working his
mine? No, sir.
Did Mr. Guinevere provide the heating stove that
you had? No, sir. Your father had to purchase that?
Right. I see. And he used the wages from the mine.
That's right.
What did you and your sisters and your mother do
while your dad was away during the day? Staying at
home because my mother and my daddy, he didn't let
her go nowhere else. I see. Did your mother take
care of the garden? Yes, sir. I see. And was the
garden planted right next to your house? Yes, sir.
Right in front of it or behind it? Yes. I see. Do you
remember what kind of vegetables your mother
planted? No, sir. before
we get into the story of how you and your husband
built this marvelous house that you had, I want to
ask one more question about the mines. Most of the
miners were from Mexico. Is that correct? Yes. Do
you remember any black miners? Any Negro miners?
No, sir.
Do you ever have a desire to To go to Mexico, or have
you been? I've been to Mexico, two towns. I see.
What parts of Mexico? San Benito Juarez. Right.
And I stay over there about two weeks, me and my
husband and my family. I see. Did you enjoy it? Yes,
sir. I like it. Would you like to go back and visit?
Yes, sir. Would you like to live there, do you
think? No, sir. Okay. Let me go ahead and flip the
tape so we won't have to do that.